# Network Security Fundamentals
Network Security Fundamentals
Modern networks need robust security to protect data and processes from cyber threats. There are several tools at your disposal to protect all aspects of your network like firewalls and IDS (intrusion detection system). These protect your incoming and outgoing network traffic. It is very important to ensure the integrity and availability of your network. Using VPNs is a great way to encrypt your data as well
Network security is vital attacking your network is a good way to intercept data a monitor processes. intrusion detection system is a network security designed for Users who often create criteria to detect intrusions and attacks. can detect things like suspicious user activity. IDS does not take action on these alerts. IDS can detect suspicious activity called signatures. These are patterns of malicious software that the system can detect. You will find operators in the soc for a company monitoring network traffic and responding to alerts. IDS is great because it offers a fast response time to a security event. Some types of IDS you have are network-based(NIDS) and host-based(HIDS). Network-based monitors a whole network infastructure while host-based simply just monitors a single device. IDS can sometimes be confused with firewalls, which are much different.
Firewalls walls are similar in the way that they monitor incoming and outgoing network traffic but the firewall can decide to block traffic where as the IDS only alerts. Firewalls are more mainstream they can be hardware, software, or a service. Firewalls can be applied to your network or just your device. Most come with a firewall pre-installed. The reason you would choose IDS over a firewall is that firewalls only block out obvious malicious traffic. IDS is more suited for a company than individual users. An extra added layer of security could be a VPN or a proxy.
A virtual private network encrypts your connection over the internet. It's especially useful over public networks because your traffic can be easily monitored on a public wifi gathering your information. A VPN would easily combat this. Companies often deploy VPNs to all their employees. A VPN can give you access to a geo-restricted service. In some cases, a VPN can slow your internet speed. Proxies are similar but not the same. A proxy passes data through a gateway anonymously hiding just your IP address. The proxy itself can be a computer or a router. The proxy is a middleman that communicates with the internet on your behalf.
Wifi can be a target too. Without the proper wifi encryption, attackers can see your activity through your wifi. You have WEP which is the least secure. It uses a shared key to authenticate users. The most secure is WPA3 its latest security right now. It uses an automatic encryption called Perfect Forward Secrecy. 
Without these securities in place, you're an easy target. There are many different choices like VPN if you are on public networks or IDS for companies with sensitive information. These all ensure security and reliability.
"Cisco. 'What Is a Firewall?' Cisco, https://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/products/security/firewalls/what-is-a-firewall.html. Accessed 17 May 2024."
"Virtual Private Network (VPN)." Microsoft Azure, Microsoft, https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/resources/cloud-computing-dictionary/what-is-vpn. Accessed 17 May 2024.
Brook, Chris. "What Is a Proxy Server? Definition, How It Works & More." Digital Guardian, Fortra, 8 May 2023, https://www.digitalguardian.com/blog/what-proxy-server-definition-how-it-works-more. Accessed 17 May 2024.
